Supported signatures (#2659)
dfinity/portal: docs/developer-docs/multi-chain/overview.mdx

---
keywords: [advanced, bitcoin, btc, ckbtc, overview, multichain, multi-chain, ethereum, evm, eth, cketh]
---

import useBaseUrl from "@docusaurus/useBaseUrl";
import { MarkdownChipRow } from "/src/components/Chip/MarkdownChipRow";

# Overview

<MarkdownChipRow labels={["Advanced", "Multi-chain", "Concept" ]} />

## What is multi-chain?

The term 'multi-chain' refers to the Internet Computer's ability to trustlessly make direct calls to another blockchain, enabling dapps to expand their capabilities across multiple networks. ICP smart contracts can interact with another chain's smart contracts and native assets. Multi-chain introduces the decentralized custody of assets. Smart contracts can have multiple addresses for receving and holding assets of other chains. 

> By interacting with assets on other chains, smart contracts can unleash unprecedented possibilities by tapping into the unbounded scalability of IC with extremely low costs, while still preserving the highest degree of security. This ability to communicate directly with other blockchain networks is possible using the protocol's unique cryptography features, which support decentralized signing of transactions that natively execute on other networks. ICP currently has multi-chain integrations with the Bitcoin and Ethereum networks.

Reviewer: Sam and Ulan suggested to stay away from the marketing language. Sorry for the confusion.

```suggestion
By interacting with assets on other chains, smart contracts can unleash new possibilities by tapping into the fast finality, low costs and reverse gas model of the IC, while still preserving the highest degree of security. This ability to communicate directly with other blockchain networks is possible using the protocol's unique cryptography features, which support decentralized signing of transactions that natively execute on other networks. ICP currently has multi-chain integrations with the Bitcoin and Ethereum networks.
```

---
keywords: [advanced, bitcoin, btc, ckbtc, overview, multichain, multi-chain, ethereum, evm, eth, cketh]
---

import useBaseUrl from "@docusaurus/useBaseUrl";
import { MarkdownChipRow } from "/src/components/Chip/MarkdownChipRow";

# Overview

<MarkdownChipRow labels={["Advanced", "Multi-chain", "Concept" ]} />

## What is multi-chain?

> The term 'multi-chain' refers to the Internet Computer's ability to trustlessly make direct calls to another blockchain, enabling dapps to expand their capabilities across multiple networks. ICP smart contracts can interact with another chain's smart contracts and process the chain's native assets. This ability to communicate directly with other blockchain networks is possible using the protocol's unique cryptography features, which support signing transactions that execute on other networks. ICP currently has multi-chain integrations with the Bitcoin and Ethereum networks.

Reviewer: > and process the chain's native assets

I'm not a native speaker, but "process assets" sounds weird to me. WDYT about "manage ... assets"?

> The term 'multi-chain' refers to the Internet Computer's ability to trustlessly make direct calls to another blockchain, enabling dapps to expand their capabilities across multiple networks. ICP smart contracts can interact with another chain's smart contracts and process the chain's native assets. This ability to communicate directly with other blockchain networks is possible using the protocol's unique cryptography features, which support signing transactions that execute on other networks. ICP currently has multi-chain integrations with the Bitcoin and Ethereum networks.

Author: Added "By interacting with assets on other chains, smart contracts can unleash unprecedented possibilities by tapping into the unbounded scalability of IC with extremely low costs while still preserving the highest degree of security. "

Traditionally, for one blockchain to communicate in this manner with other chains, they need to use a blockchain 'bridge'. Traditional bridges introduce several problems:

- The bridge is an intermediary service that must be trusted to handle transactions and assets honestly and properly.

- Bridges can be subjects of security vulnerabilities and exploits.

- Transaction times have a high amount of latency.

- Bridges do not meet regulatory standards.

> On ICP, there is no bridge, hub, or other intermediary — just two chains communicating directly.

Author: Revised to plural

## How multi-chain on ICP works

Multi-chain is possible through the unique features of ICP: [threshold ECDSA signatures](/docs/current/references/t-ecdsa-how-it-works), chain-key cryptography, and [HTTPS outcalls](/docs/current/references/https-outcalls-how-it-works).

> Threshold ECDSA signatures, combined with chain-key cryptography, allow ICP smart contracts to create [signed transactions](/docs/current/developer-docs/smart-contracts/encryption/signing-transactions) on other networks. By submitting transactions directly to other chains, ICP dapps can interact directly with another chain's smart contracts, assets, and tokens.

Author: Revised to "to create signed transactions that are submitted on other networks to be executed."

HTTPS outcalls are used to communicate with external entities, and are used by the EVM RPC canister, allowing smart contracts to interact with JSON-RPC services for EVM-compatible chains.

Integrations with different chains vary in how they utilize these features to facilitate the integration.

### Bitcoin integration

> The integration with Bitcoin primarily uses the threshold ECDSA feature along with a Bitcoin adapter. Threshold ECDSA is used to securely store a smart contract's secret key, which is used to sign transactions. Bitcoin supports ECDSA, allowing ICP smart contracts to directly create and sign transactions on the Bitcoin network. Canisters can also create a Bitcoin address, then send and receive bitcoin as if they were a traditional Bitcoin user.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The integration with Bitcoin primarily uses the threshold ECDSA signing service along with a Bitcoin adapter. The threshold ECDSA signing service is facilitated by a special large subnet, where each node securely stores a share of the subnet's secret key. To create a signature, the nodes of this subnet need to collaborate with each other. Canisters can then request ECDSA signatures from this signing service in order to create valid transactions for other chains. This way they don't need to own their own secret key. Since Bitcoin supports ECDSA signatures, the ICP smart contracts are able to directly create, sign  and submit transactions to the Bitcoin network. Each canisters has an individual Bitcoin address, which can be used to send and receive bitcoin as if they were a traditional Bitcoin user.
```

> The Bitcoin adapter is a subnet of nodes that participate in the Bitcoin network. They fetch the Bitcoin network state and blocks, then facilitate sending transactions to the Bitcoin network.

Reviewer 2: > The Bitcoin adapter is a subnet of nodes that participate in the Bitcoin network. 

I don't think this is accurate. The Bitcoin adapter is a process that runs side by side with the replica on IC nodes (technically on all nodes but only active on the nodes of the subnet where the Bitcoin canisters live) and communicates with the Bitcoin network. They don't really participate in the sense that they don't mine blocks -- they simply follow the bitcoin chain (you can loosely consider the bitcoin adapter our own custom lightweight bitcoin client).

Reviewer: Agreed. I am not even sure it these technical details need to be on the overview page?

I would write something vague like, the IC nodes have a special extension called the Bitcoin adapter allowing them to _directly_ fetch the Bitcoin network state and blocks, then facilitate sending transactions to the Bitcoin network.

Author: Revised to "ICP nodes have a special extension called the Bitcoin adapter allowing them to directly fetch the Bitcoin network state and blocks, then facilitate sending transactions to the Bitcoin network."

[Learn more about how the Ethereum integration works](/docs/current/developer-docs/multi-chain/ethereum/overview).

## Benefits of multi-chain

When compared to traditional blockchain bridges, ICP's multi-chain capabilities have several benefits:

- **Enhanced programmability**: Dapps can expand their functionalities and capabilities beyond just ICP, allowing for new use-cases and applications.

- **Orchestration**: Transactions on integrated networks can be orchestrated and automated using ICP smart contracts.

- **Security and privacy**: ICP's direct integration with other chains is more secure than using an intermediary blockchain bridge, which may have security vulnerabilities and be exploited.

- **Lower transaction costs**: Submitting transactions to Bitcoin or Ethereum from an ICP smart contract have a significantly lower cost than submitting transactions on the chains directly.

- **Faster transaction times**: Transaction times on Bitcoin and Ethereum are drastically reduced by using the ICP multi-chain integrations for each.

## Multi-chain integrations

> Current multi-chain integrations include Bitcoin and Ethereum, and the EVM RPC canister can be used to interact with any EVM-compatible chain, such as Polygon or Avalanche.  Direct integration with other chains is possible, and developers can build their own.

Reviewer: IS there a special reason for mentioning Polygon? Can we instead refer to the most decentralized L2?
```suggestion
Current multi-chain integrations include Bitcoin and Ethereum, and the EVM RPC canister can be used to interact with any EVM-compatible chain, such as Arbitrum or Avalanche.  Direct integration with other chains is possible, and developers can build their own.
```

## Multi-chain tokens

> ICP supports multi-chain tokens that are created using chain-key cryptography. These tokens are digital twins of their corresponding native token and are backed 1:1 by their native token. that is held 100% on-chain on ICP. For example, ckBTC is the digital twin of BTC, and ckETH is the digital twin of ETH.

Reviewer: Something is wrong here. I'll try to correct:

```suggestion
ICP supports multi-chain tokens that are created using chain-key cryptography. These tokens are digital twins of their corresponding native token and are backed 1:1 by their native token. For example, ckBTC is the digital twin of BTC, and ckETH is the digital twin of ETH. The backing native assets are managed 100% on-chain by decentralized canisters without any intermediaries.
```

> Chain-key tokens are different from traditional wrapped tokens. Chain-key tokens use advanced cryptography to create an identical corresponding token with the same properties and valuation, but hosted on ICP. Traditional wrapped tokens use underlying assets with different properties.
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Chain-key tokens are different from traditional wrapped tokens. While both create an identical corresponding token with the same properties and valuation, the main difference with wrapped tokens is in the redemption guarantees into the native tokens. The management of native assets and conversion from the chain-key token into the native token happens in a fully trustless manner and is based upon an advanced cryptography. While the traditional wrapped tokens usually rely on centralized pieces of infrastructure (bridges) connecting two chains which is inherently less secure.

```

Chain-key tokens don't use blockchain bridges, intermediaries, or centralized entities. All chain-key operations are performed on-chain. They also have a faster finality time and a cheaper transaction cost than wrapped tokens typically have.

Currently supported multi-chain tokens include:

- [ckBTC](/docs/current/developer-docs/multi-chain/bitcoin/ckbtc)

- [ckETH](/docs/current/developer-docs/multi-chain/ethereum/cketh)

In the future, chain-key tokens are planned for:

> - ckERC-20

Reviewer: This shouldn't be here. If at all, then as a third point and rather as "And other ERC20 twins"

Author: Revised to "In the future, chain-key tokens are planned for other ERC20 twins."
